README.md, before:

# `GM_config`

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Crazy%20Thur.-V%20me%2050-red?logo=kfc)](https://greasyfork.org/rails/active_storage/blobs/redirect/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBBaWZvIiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--10e04ed7ed56ae18d22cec6d675b34fd579cecab/wechat.jpeg?locale=zh-CN)

## 🪄 Function

Simple config lib for Tampermonkey scripts. ([Greasy Fork](https://greasyfork.org/scripts/470224)) ([GitHub](https://github.com/PRO-2684/gadgets/tree/main/GM_config))

## 🎉 Features

- **Automatically update the menu** when config is modified (by either user or script)
- Support **listeners for config get/set**
- Support **multi-tab synchronization**
- Support **folders** (nested config items)
- Support either auto or manual menu registration
- Highly **customizable**
    - Customizable config value input method (`prop.input`)
    - Customizable processors for user inputs (`prop.processor`)
    - Customizable menu command display (`prop.formatter`)
- Automatically delete user config that is equal to default value, in order to save storage space

## 🤔 Permission

This library needs the following permissions to work:

```javascript
// @grant        GM_setValue // Save your config
// @grant        GM_getValue // Get your config
// @grant        GM_deleteValue // Automatically delete your config (Optional. If granted, this lib will delete user config that is equal to default value)
// @grant        GM_registerMenuCommand // Register menu
// @grant        GM_unregisterMenuCommand // Update menu
// @grant        GM_addValueChangeListener // Listen for config changes
```

**Delete the comment** if you copied and pasted the code, or there might be errors. You may want to delete `@grant none` (if present). If you used `window` object in your script, try `@grant unsafeWindow` and then `let window = unsafeWindow`.

## 📖 Usage

### Determine version

```javascript
console.log(GM_config.version); // *Print version*
```

### Config description

The first step is to define your config description, which is a dictionary and each of its key (apart from possible `$default`) represents the id of a config item. Note that no `.` is allowed in the id.

#### `$default`

By using `$default`, you can easily create a lot of config items of the same type. If `$default` is not specified in config description, following values will be used to fill unspecified fields in a config item:

```javascript
{ // Priority: Lowest
    type: "string",
    input: "prompt",
    processor: "same",
    formatter: "normal"
}
```

If you'd like to modify the default value, you may provide `$default` in your config description to override the above default values. e.g.:

```javascript
const configDesc = {
    "$default": { // Priority: Low
        value: true,
        input: "current",
        processor: "not",
        formatter: "boolean"
    },
    switch_true: {
        name: "Switch true"
    },
    switch_false: {
        name: "Switch false",
        value: false // Priority: Highest
    }
}
```

Usually, however, the following `prop.type` is the best choice to quickly set up similar config items, and `$default` is solely used for setting `autoClose` to `false`:

```javascript
const configDesc = {
    "$default": {
        autoClose: false
    },
    // ...
}
```

#### `prop.type`

The type of the config item, used for quickly setting up common properties. Currently supported types are:

- `str`: String
- `bool`: Boolean
- `int`: Integer
- `float`: Float
- `action`: Calls function(s) when clicked
    - You should not override `prop.input` and `prop.processor` for this type
    - Listen for this property's `get` events using `config.addEventListener` to set up callback(s)
- `folder`: A folder that contains other config items
    - You should override `prop.items` to create config items in this folder, which should be in the same format as the top-level config description `configDesc`
    - You may use `$default` in a folder
    - You may nest folders as many as you like
    - Use dotted names to access nested config items, i.e.
        - `config.get("folder1.folder2.item")`
        - `config.proxy["folder1.folder2.item"]`
        - `config.proxy.folder1.folder2.item`
        - `config.proxy["folder1.folder2"].item`

You may use it like this:

```javascript
const configDesc = {
    switch_true: {
        name: "Switch true",
        type: "bool" // Priority: High
    },
    switch_false: {
        name: "Switch false",
        type: "bool", // Priority: High
        value: false // Priority: Highest
    }
}
```

#### `prop.name`

The display name of the config item. Expected type: `string`.

#### `prop.value`

The default value of the config item, can be of any type. Note that you should consider its validity, because this lib will not check default value's validity for you.

#### `prop.input`

> `(prop, orig) => input`

How to get user input. Expected a string (built-in input method) or a function (invoked when user clicks the menu item). It **accepts the name of config item and returns user input**. If not specified by both `prop.input` and `$default.input`, `prompt` will be used, i.e. ask for user input using `prompt()`. Note that "user input value" does not necessarily have to be actually input by user, it can be provided by script. (e.g. built-in input method `current`).

Built-in input methods:

- `prompt`: Ask for user input using `prompt()` (default value)
- `current`: Current value will be used as user input (Usually used with `prop.processor=not` so as to create a switch, or with custom `processor` to create a generator)
- `action`: Dispatches a `get` event and returns the original value. Will `autoClose` the menu to indicate that the click is successful. (Used internally by `action` type)
- `folder`: Goes down the given folder specified by the config item's id. After this, dispatches a `get` event and returns the original value. Will not `autoClose` the menu. (Used internally by `folder` type)

#### `prop.processor`

> `(input) => stored`

How to process user input. Expected a string (built-in processor) or a function. It **accepts user input and returns value to be stored**. **Throw error** if user input is invalid. If not specified by both `prop.formatter` and `$default.formatter`, `same` will be used, i.e. return user input directly. A common use case is to convert user input to integers or floats.

Built-in processors:

- `same`: Return user input directly
- `not`: Invert boolean value (Usually used with `prop.input=current` so as to create a switch)
- `int`: Convert to integer
- `int_range-min-max`: Convert to integer in range `[min, max]`
    - It is not advisable to omit `-`, because there might be errors.
    - `<min>` and `<max>` can be any integer. Not provided inferred as no limit on that side.
- `float`: Convert to float
- `float_range-min-max`: Convert to float in range `[min, max]`
    - It is not advisable to omit `-`, because there might be errors.
    - `<min>` and `<max>` can be any float. Not provided inferred as no limit on that side.

#### `prop.formatter`

> `(name, value) => string`

How to display the menu item. Expected a string (built-in formatter) or a function. It **accepts the name of config item and its current value, and returns the text to be displayed on the menu**. If not specified by both `prop.formatter` and `$default.formatter`, `normal` will be used.

Built-in formatters:

- `normal`: Display in the format of `name: value`
- `boolean`: Display method aimed for boolean values. `true` will be displayed as `name: ✔`, `false` will be displayed as `name: ✘`.
- `name_only`: Only show the name of the config item (Used internally by `action` type)
- `folder`: Wrap the name with `options.folderDisplay.prefix` and `options.folderDisplay.suffix`. (Used internally by `folder` type)

#### Other Tampermonkey provided properties

Supports `prop.accessKey`, `prop.autoClose`, `prop.title` (Require TM >=4.20.0). If a function is provided, it will be called with argument `prop`, `name` and `value`, and the returned string will be passed to Tampermonkey. See [Tampermonkey docs](https://www.tampermonkey.net/documentation.php#api:GM_registerMenuCommand) for details.

#### Priorities

The priority of the properties is as follows (from highest to lowest):

1. The properties you explicitly set for each config item
2. The properties implied by the `type` of the config item
3. The properties you set for `$default` in this folder
4. Calculated `$default` for parent folder
5. The default values for `$default`

### Register menu

After defining your config description, you can register the menu item by constructing a `GM_config` instance. The constructor accepts the following two arguments:

- `configDesc`: Your config description
- `options`: Options (optional)
    - `immediate`: Whether to register the menu items immediately.
        - If set to `true`, the menu item will be registered immediately. (default value)
        - If set to `false`, the user need to click "Show configuration" to register it.
    - `debug`: Whether to enable debug mode. If set to `true`, debug information will be printed to console. Default value is `false`. (Can be modified by `config.debug` at any time)
    - `folderDisplay`: Controls how a `folder` type config item is displayed.
        - `prefix`: Prefix of a folder name. Default value is empty string.
        - `suffix`: Suffix of a folder name. Default value is ` >`.
        - `parentText`: The text indicating the parent folder. Default value is `< Back`.
        - `parentTitle`: The title of the parent folder. Default value is `Return to parent folder`.

```javascript
const config = new GM_config(configDesc, { immediate: false }); // *Register menu*
console.log(config.get("price")); // *You may now start using the config 🎉*
```

### Get/set/list config

After registering the menu, you can get/set config by accessing the `GM_config` instance. e.g:

```javascript
console.log(config.get("price")); // *Get config*
config.set("price", 100); // *Modify config* (The menu will be updated automatically)
```

Alternatively, operate on `config.proxy` to get/set config. e.g:

```javascript
console.log(config.proxy.price); // *Get config*
config.proxy.price = 100; // *Modify config* (The menu will be updated automatically)
```

To list config items at given folder, use `config.list(folder)`. e.g:

```javascript
console.log(config.list("someFolder.folder")); // *List config items in someFolder.folder*
```

Since the proxy object is iterable deeply proxied, you can also use `for` or `Object.keys` to list all config items. e.g:

```javascript
for (const [name, value] of Object.entries(config.proxy.someFolder.folder)) {
    console.log(name, value);
}
console.log(Object.keys(config.proxy.someFolder.folder));
```

### Listen for config get/set

You can listen for config get/set by calling `config.addEventListener(type, listener, options?)`:

```javascript
config.addEventListener("set", (e) => {
    console.log(e.detail); // *Config is modified*
});
config.addEventListener("get", (e) => {
    console.log(e.detail); // *Config is accessed*
});
```

It should be noted that:

- `get` event is only triggered when the config is accessed by current script instance
- `set` event is triggered when the config is modified from *any sources*, making multi-tab synchronization possible

As you might have expected, you can remove the listener by calling `config.removeEventListener(type, listener, options?)`. These two methods are identical to [`EventTarget.addEventListener`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/addEventListener) and [`EventTarget.removeEventListener`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/removeEventListener).

`e.detail` is a dictionary with the following properties:

- `prop`: The id of the config item accessed/modified. Use dots to represent nested config items.
- `before`: The value of the config item before the operation.
- `after`: The value of the config item after the operation.
- `remote`: Indicating whether this modification is caused by other script instances. Always `false` for `get` event (cannot detect other instances' accesses).

This feature is often used to update your script dynamically when config is modified. In this lib, auto-updating menu is implemented by this feature.

### Sum up: the process of modifying config

1. User clicks the menu command
2. Pass `prop.name` and current value to `prop.input` to get user input
3. Pass user input to `prop.processor` to get processed value
4. Save processed value
5. Dispatch event with corresponding detail
6. Update menu command (triggered by the event)

### Sum up: operating on `config.proxy` vs `config`

| Operation | `config` | `config.proxy` |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Get config | `config.get("price")` | `config.proxy.price` |
| Set config | `config.set("price", 100)` | `config.proxy.price = 100` |
| List config | `config.list("someFolder.folder")` | `Object.keys(config.proxy.someFolder.folder)` |

Internally, all operations on `config.proxy` are mapped to operations on `config`.

## 👀 Working example

Install [this test code](./test_config.user.js), and see how does it work; Or you can try out this lib in action with [Greasy Fork Enhance](https://greasyfork.org/scripts/467078).

## ⚠️ Note

This project is in early development, and the API may change in the future. If you have any suggestions or find any bugs, please feel free to open an issue or pull request.

Commit message:

feat(`GM_config`): `up`, `down`, `currentPath`

README.md, after:

# `GM_config`

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Crazy%20Thur.-V%20me%2050-red?logo=kfc)](https://greasyfork.org/rails/active_storage/blobs/redirect/eyJfcmFpbHMiOnsibWVzc2FnZSI6IkJBaHBBaWZvIiwiZXhwIjpudWxsLCJwdXIiOiJibG9iX2lkIn19--10e04ed7ed56ae18d22cec6d675b34fd579cecab/wechat.jpeg?locale=zh-CN)

## 🪄 Function

Simple config lib for Tampermonkey scripts. ([Greasy Fork](https://greasyfork.org/scripts/470224)) ([GitHub](https://github.com/PRO-2684/gadgets/tree/main/GM_config))

## 🎉 Features

- **Automatically update the menu** when config is modified (by either user or script)
- Support **listeners for config get/set**
- Support **multi-tab synchronization**
- Support **folders** (nested config items)
- Support either auto or manual menu registration
- Highly **customizable**
    - Customizable config value input method (`prop.input`)
    - Customizable processors for user inputs (`prop.processor`)
    - Customizable menu command display (`prop.formatter`)
- Automatically delete user config that is equal to default value, in order to save storage space

## 🤔 Permission

This library needs the following permissions to work:

```javascript
// @grant        GM_setValue // Save your config
// @grant        GM_getValue // Get your config
// @grant        GM_deleteValue // Automatically delete your config (Optional. If granted, this lib will delete user config that is equal to default value)
// @grant        GM_registerMenuCommand // Register menu
// @grant        GM_unregisterMenuCommand // Update menu
// @grant        GM_addValueChangeListener // Listen for config changes
```

**Delete the comment** if you copied and pasted the code, or there might be errors. You may want to delete `@grant none` (if present). If you used `window` object in your script, try `@grant unsafeWindow` and then `let window = unsafeWindow`.

## 📖 Usage

### Determine version

```javascript
console.log(GM_config.version); // *Print version*
```

### Config description

The first step is to define your config description, which is a dictionary and each of its key (apart from possible `$default`) represents the id of a config item. Note that no `.` is allowed in the id.

#### `$default`

By using `$default`, you can easily create a lot of config items of the same type. If `$default` is not specified in config description, following values will be used to fill unspecified fields in a config item:

```javascript
{ // Priority: Lowest
    type: "string",
    input: "prompt",
    processor: "same",
    formatter: "normal"
}
```

If you'd like to modify the default value, you may provide `$default` in your config description to override the above default values. e.g.:

```javascript
const configDesc = {
    "$default": { // Priority: Low
        value: true,
        input: "current",
        processor: "not",
        formatter: "boolean"
    },
    switch_true: {
        name: "Switch true"
    },
    switch_false: {
        name: "Switch false",
        value: false // Priority: Highest
    }
}
```

Usually, however, the following `prop.type` is the best choice to quickly set up similar config items, and `$default` is solely used for setting `autoClose` to `false`:

```javascript
const configDesc = {
    "$default": {
        autoClose: false
    },
    // ...
}
```

#### `prop.type`

The type of the config item, used for quickly setting up common properties. Currently supported types are:

- `str`: String
- `bool`: Boolean
- `int`: Integer
- `float`: Float
- `action`: Calls function(s) when clicked
    - You should not override `prop.input` and `prop.processor` for this type
    - Listen for this property's `get` events using `config.addEventListener` to set up callback(s)
- `folder`: A folder that contains other config items
    - You should override `prop.items` to create config items in this folder, which should be in the same format as the top-level config description `configDesc`
    - You may use `$default` in a folder
    - You may nest folders as many as you like
    - Use dotted names to access nested config items, i.e.
        - `config.get("folder1.folder2.item")`
        - `config.proxy["folder1.folder2.item"]`
        - `config.proxy.folder1.folder2.item`
        - `config.proxy["folder1.folder2"].item`

You may use it like this:

```javascript
const configDesc = {
    switch_true: {
        name: "Switch true",
        type: "bool" // Priority: High
    },
    switch_false: {
        name: "Switch false",
        type: "bool", // Priority: High
        value: false // Priority: Highest
    }
}
```

#### `prop.name`

The display name of the config item. Expected type: `string`.

#### `prop.value`

The default value of the config item, can be of any type. Note that you should consider its validity, because this lib will not check default value's validity for you.

#### `prop.input`

> `(prop, orig) => input`

How to get user input. Expected a string (built-in input method) or a function (invoked when user clicks the menu item). It **accepts the name of config item and returns user input**. If not specified by both `prop.input` and `$default.input`, `prompt` will be used, i.e. ask for user input using `prompt()`. Note that "user input value" does not necessarily have to be actually input by user, it can be provided by script. (e.g. built-in input method `current`).

Built-in input methods:

- `prompt`: Ask for user input using `prompt()` (default value)
- `current`: Current value will be used as user input (Usually used with `prop.processor=not` so as to create a switch, or with custom `processor` to create a generator)
- `action`: Dispatches a `get` event and returns the original value. Will `autoClose` the menu to indicate that the click is successful. (Used internally by `action` type)
- `folder`: Goes down the given folder specified by the config item's id. After this, dispatches a `get` event and returns the original value. Will not `autoClose` the menu. (Used internally by `folder` type)

#### `prop.processor`

> `(input) => stored`

How to process user input. Expected a string (built-in processor) or a function. It **accepts user input and returns value to be stored**. **Throw error** if user input is invalid. If not specified by both `prop.formatter` and `$default.formatter`, `same` will be used, i.e. return user input directly. A common use case is to convert user input to integers or floats.

Built-in processors:

- `same`: Return user input directly
- `not`: Invert boolean value (Usually used with `prop.input=current` so as to create a switch)
- `int`: Convert to integer
- `int_range-min-max`: Convert to integer in range `[min, max]`
    - It is not advisable to omit `-`, because there might be errors.
    - `<min>` and `<max>` can be any integer. Not provided inferred as no limit on that side.
- `float`: Convert to float
- `float_range-min-max`: Convert to float in range `[min, max]`
    - It is not advisable to omit `-`, because there might be errors.
    - `<min>` and `<max>` can be any float. Not provided inferred as no limit on that side.

#### `prop.formatter`

> `(name, value) => string`

How to display the menu item. Expected a string (built-in formatter) or a function. It **accepts the name of config item and its current value, and returns the text to be displayed on the menu**. If not specified by both `prop.formatter` and `$default.formatter`, `normal` will be used.

Built-in formatters:

- `normal`: Display in the format of `name: value`
- `boolean`: Display method aimed for boolean values. `true` will be displayed as `name: ✔`, `false` will be displayed as `name: ✘`.
- `name_only`: Only show the name of the config item (Used internally by `action` type)
- `folder`: Wrap the name with `options.folderDisplay.prefix` and `options.folderDisplay.suffix`. (Used internally by `folder` type)

#### Other Tampermonkey provided properties

Supports `prop.accessKey`, `prop.autoClose`, `prop.title` (Require TM >=4.20.0). If a function is provided, it will be called with argument `prop`, `name` and `value`, and the returned string will be passed to Tampermonkey. See [Tampermonkey docs](https://www.tampermonkey.net/documentation.php#api:GM_registerMenuCommand) for details.

#### Priorities

The priority of the properties is as follows (from highest to lowest):

1. The properties you explicitly set for each config item
2. The properties implied by the `type` of the config item
3. The properties you set for `$default` in this folder
4. Calculated `$default` for parent folder
5. The default values for `$default`

### Register menu

After defining your config description, you can register the menu item by constructing a `GM_config` instance. The constructor accepts the following two arguments:

- `configDesc`: Your config description
- `options`: Options (optional)
    - `immediate`: Whether to register the menu items immediately.
        - If set to `true`, the menu item will be registered immediately. (default value)
        - If set to `false`, the user need to click "Show configuration" to register it.
    - `debug`: Whether to enable debug mode. If set to `true`, debug information will be printed to console. Default value is `false`. (Can be modified by `config.debug` at any time)
    - `folderDisplay`: Controls how a `folder` type config item is displayed.
        - `prefix`: Prefix of a folder name. Default value is empty string.
        - `suffix`: Suffix of a folder name. Default value is ` >`.
        - `parentText`: The text indicating the parent folder. Default value is `< Back`.
        - `parentTitle`: The title of the parent folder. Default value is `Return to parent folder`.

```javascript
const config = new GM_config(configDesc, { immediate: false }); // *Register menu*
console.log(config.get("price")); // *You may now start using the config 🎉*
```

### Get/set/list config

After registering the menu, you can get/set config by accessing the `GM_config` instance. e.g:

```javascript
console.log(config.get("price")); // *Get config*
config.set("price", 100); // *Modify config* (The menu will be updated automatically)
```

Alternatively, operate on `config.proxy` to get/set config. e.g:

```javascript
console.log(config.proxy.price); // *Get config*
config.proxy.price = 100; // *Modify config* (The menu will be updated automatically)
```

To list config items at given folder, use `config.list(folder)`. e.g:

```javascript
console.log(config.list("someFolder.folder")); // *List config items in someFolder.folder*
```

Since the proxy object is iterable deeply proxied, you can also use `for` or `Object.keys` to list all config items. e.g:

```javascript
for (const [name, value] of Object.entries(config.proxy.someFolder.folder)) {
    console.log(name, value);
}
console.log(Object.keys(config.proxy.someFolder.folder));
```

### Listen for config get/set

You can listen for config get/set by calling `config.addEventListener(type, listener, options?)`:

```javascript
config.addEventListener("set", (e) => {
    console.log(e.detail); // *Config is modified*
});
config.addEventListener("get", (e) => {
    console.log(e.detail); // *Config is accessed*
});
```

It should be noted that:

- `get` event is only triggered when the config is accessed by current script instance
- `set` event is triggered when the config is modified from *any sources*, making multi-tab synchronization possible

As you might have expected, you can remove the listener by calling `config.removeEventListener(type, listener, options?)`. These two methods are identical to [`EventTarget.addEventListener`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/addEventListener) and [`EventTarget.removeEventListener`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/removeEventListener).

`e.detail` is a dictionary with the following properties:

- `prop`: The id of the config item accessed/modified. Use dots to represent nested config items.
- `before`: The value of the config item before the operation.
- `after`: The value of the config item after the operation.
- `remote`: Indicating whether this modification is caused by other script instances. Always `false` for `get` event (cannot detect other instances' accesses).

This feature is often used to update your script dynamically when config is modified. In this lib, auto-updating menu is implemented by this feature.

### Programmatic folder navigation

You can call `config.up()` and `config.down(name)` to navigate up and down the folder hierarchy, and `config.currentPath` to check the current path. To be specific:

- `config.up()`: Go up one level. If already at the top level, simply re-register. Returns a `string` indicating the parent folder, or `null` if already at the root.
- `config.down(name)`: Go down to the folder specified by `name`. If `name` is not a folder, do nothing. Returns `true` if successfully navigated, `false` otherwise.
- `config.currentPath`: A list of `string`, each representing a folder, in the order from the root to the current folder. Note that this property is read-only.

### Sum up: the process of modifying config

1. User clicks the menu command
2. Pass `prop.name` and current value to `prop.input` to get user input
3. Pass user input to `prop.processor` to get processed value
4. Save processed value
5. Dispatch event with corresponding detail
6. Update menu command (triggered by the event)

### Sum up: operating on `config.proxy` vs `config`

| Operation | `config` | `config.proxy` |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Get config | `config.get("price")` | `config.proxy.price` |
| Set config | `config.set("price", 100)` | `config.proxy.price = 100` |
| List config | `config.list("someFolder.folder")` | `Object.keys(config.proxy.someFolder.folder)` |

Internally, all operations on `config.proxy` are mapped to operations on `config`.

## 👀 Working example

Install [this test code](./test_config.user.js), and see how does it work; Or you can try out this lib in action with [Greasy Fork Enhance](https://greasyfork.org/scripts/467078).

## ⚠️ Note

This project is in early development, and the API may change in the future. If you have any suggestions or find any bugs, please feel free to open an issue or pull request.
